---
layout: post
title: "DDR4 estimated and realistic bandwidth" 
date: 2025-05-16
---

Recently I was working on a design using a DDR memory chip and I wanted to use it as a buffer for a video stream. I needed to run 4kp60 video through the memory, so we would need approximately `12 Gbit` write and `12 Gbit` read.

The design had a ddr4 module connected with 16bit bus and could run it at 1066Mhz resulting in a theoretical bandwidth `1066*2*16 = 34.112Gbit/s`.

Now for the design we needed about `~25 Gbit` bandwidth, and so I wondered is this possible to achieve?

I remembered someone once told me you can probably achieve `3/4` of the maximum theoretical bandwidth in a standard design.
So now I was thinking with `3/4` we should be able to do `25.584 Gb/s` which should be just enough for what we need. 

Also I wondered what speeds could we theoretically achieve.

So to get the answers I made some prototype code to gather the info. 
The design was just a simple generator generating data that is written to memory and a verification unit that read out the data and checked the data for correctness.

The prototype design could continuously write a "video frame" and read the data out in a one to one fashion where a read was triggered by the write. It was also possible to continuously write only or continuously read only.
The design was not optimized for trying to mach up read and write so to achieve better hit with paging and so on in the memory.
So a quite straight forward design to test what we could achieve.

## Results
For the read/write test we got a similar rate on read and write, which makes sense since one read was triggered by one write, the resulting read write rate achieved was `12.6 Gb/s` resulting in a total bandwidth of `25.2 Gb/s`. This sums up to a utilization at `75.7%` which is right at the `3/4` that one could accept so this seems like a plausible and expected result for the memory with a straight forward read/write design.

When testing read only I achieved a result of about `26.7 Gb/s` resulting in a utilization at about `80%`.

When testing write only I achieved a result of about `23.9 Gb/s` resulting in a utilization at about `71%`
I expect the write result is from the write source and that the generating module generated data with natural spacing in the stream, so the write part was probably not optimal for maximum write rate to memory but when interleaved with read gave a good utilization.

## Conclusion
So with the simple tests it seems like `3/4` bandwidth. 
And with a possible bandwidth of `12.6 Gb/S` read/write it should be possible to achieve the datarate needed.
